Instructions
============

This project is (initially) generated by `eliom-distillery` as the basic
project `%%%PROJECT_NAME%%%`. This version builds the application as a static
executable including the Web server as a library.

Generated files
---------------

The following files in this directory have been generated by
eliom-distillery:

 - %%%PROJECT_NAME%%%.eliom
   This is your initial source file.

 - static/
   The content of this folder is statically served. Put your CSS or
   additional JavaScript files here

 - Makefile.options
   Configure your project here

 - Makefile
   This contains all rules necessary to build, test, and run your
   Eliom application. You better don't touch it ;) See below for the
   relevant targets.

 - local/
   This directory is the target of the temporary installation of
   your application, to test locally before doing a system-wide
   installation in /. Do not put anything manually here.


Makefile targets
----------------

Here's some help on how to work with this basic distillery project:

 - Test your application by compiling it and running ocsigenserver locally
     $ make test.byte (or test.opt)

 - Compile it only
     $ make all (or byte or opt)

 - Deploy your project on your system:
   Adapt the paths in your source code to match the installation.
   The default source code is using local files in this directory.
   The default installation puts files in your opam directory
   (see variable PREFIX in file Makefile.options).
     $ make install (or install.byte or install.opt)

 - Run the server on the deployed project
     $ make run
