Instructions
============

This project is (initially) generated by `eliom-distillery` as the basic
project `%%%PROJECT_NAME%%%`. This version of the build system creates the
app as a library to be loaded dynamically into ocsigenserver
using a configuration file. 

Generated files
---------------

The following files in this directory have been generated by
eliom-distillery:

 - %%%PROJECT_NAME%%%.eliom
   This is your initial source file.

 - static/
   The content of this folder is statically served. Put your CSS or
   additional JavaScript files here

 - Makefile.options
   Configure your project here

 - %%%PROJECT_NAME%%%.conf.in
   This file is a template for the configuration file for
   ocsigenserver. You will rarely have to edit itself - it takes its
   variables from the Makefile.options. This way, the installation
   rules and the configuration files are synchronized with respect to
   the different folders.

 - Makefile
   This contains all rules necessary to build, test, and run your
   Eliom application. You better don't touch it ;) See below for the
   relevant targets.

 - local/
   This directory is the target of the temporary installation of
   your application, to test locally before doing a system-wide
   installation in /. Do not put anything manually here.


Makefile targets
----------------

Here's some help on how to work with this basic distillery project:

 - Test your application by compiling it and running ocsigenserver locally
     $ make test.byte (or test.opt)

 - Compile it only
     $ make all (or byte or opt)

 - Deploy your project on your system
     $ make install (or install.byte or install.opt)

 - Run the server on the deployed project
     $ make run.byte (or run.opt)

If you want to use a global install, update PREFIX in `Makefile.options`
and run make ```install``` as root. If OCaml/Eliom is not installed
globally, you will need to re-export some environment variables to make
this work:
```Shell
sudo PATH=$PATH OCAMLPATH=$OCAMLPATH LD_LIBRARY_PATH=$LD_LIBRARY_PATH make run.opt
```
