
= Compiling and configuring Eliom modules =

<<outline depth="2"| <<header| **Table of contents** >> >>

This chapter explains how to set Eliom's
options in the Ocsigen server configuration file, and how to define options for your
Eliom modules. See the Ocsigen server documentation for more information about the
<<a_manual project="ocsigenserver" chapter="config" |server's configuration>>.

Note, however, that <<a_manual chapter="workflow-distillery"|Eliom's
distillery>> provides templates to get started at once with Eliom!

==@@id="misc"@@Using Eliom modules with Ocsigen server==

====Configuration file

To run an Ocsigen server with an Eliom module {{{example.cmo}}},
add the following lines to the Ocsigen configuration file
(<<span class="code"|/etc/ocsigen/ocsigen.conf>> most of the times):

{{{
<extension findlib-package="eliom.server"/>
<host>
  <site path="examples">
    <eliommodule module="~///path_to///example.cmo" />
    <eliom />
  </site>
</host>
}}}

The block surrounded by the {{{<site>}}} tag creates a sub-site on your
host, in directory {{{examples}}}. The {{{<site>}}} tag is optional if
you want to register your services at the root of the server path tree.

The {{{<eliom>}}} tag defines an Eliom module to be loaded (dynamically while
starting Ocsigen server) for this subsite.

====Running Ocsigen server

Run Ocsigen server, by typing the command

{{{
ocsigenserver
}}}

or, if your configuration file is not in the default
location:

{{{
ocsigenserver -c //<your configuration file>//
}}}

You should see the page corresponding to service {{{"coucou"}}} in site
{{{examples/}}} at url\\
<<span class="code"|~http:~/~///your_server///examples/coucou>>.\\

<<concept title="Debugging" |**Tip:** Add the option {{{<debugmode/>}}} in
the configuration file during the development process of your application.
Thus, Ocsigen server will display the exceptions raised during
the generation of a page in error pages.

**Tip:** To debug your programs,
add the option {{{-v}}} or {{{-V}}} of
the {{{ocsigen}}} command to have verbose information on what succeeds
during request. Also think to have look in the log files when something goes
wrong.>>


===Several Eliom modules for one site===

If your site consists of several modules, you can load them
consecutively from the configuration file using several
{{{eliommodule}}}-tags.
Note that there can be only one <<span class="code"|<eliom>>>
tag for each <<span class="code"|<site>>>
(or <<span class="code"|<host>>>), however.

===Using findlib with Eliom modules===

If your module has a findlib <<span class="code"|META>> file,
it is also possible (and recommended!) to do:

{{{
<host>
  <site path="examples">
    <eliommodule findlib-package="//package-name//" />
    <eliom />
  </site>
</host>
}}}



===@@id="reload"@@Updating sites without shutting down the server

Ocsigen server has a feature that allows the configuration to be reloaded
without shutting down the server (see section * *).
This can be used to reload Eliom modules without closing volatile sessions.
To do that use <<span class="code"|/etc/init.d/ocsigen reload>>
for most of the distributions, or do it manually using:

{{{
echo reload > /var/run/ocsigen_command
}}}

Only modules loaded inside <<span class="code"|<host>>>,
<<span class="code"|<site>>> or
<<span class="code"|<library>>> will be reloaded.
Module loaded using <<span class="code"|<extension>>> will not.

Have a look at the logs to see if all went well during the reload.
If something went wrong, old services may still be reachable.

Warning:
* Services created with the old modules or URLs that have not been
  masked by new ones will still reachable after the update!
* During the reload, some information of the configuration file will
  not be re-read (for example port numbers, user and group, etc.).


==Interacting with Ocsigen server from Eliom programs

===Defining an exception handler for the whole site

When an exception is raised during the generation of a page, or when
the page has not been found or has wrong parameters, an HTTP error 500
or 404 is sent to the client. You may want to catch these exceptions
to print your own error page.  Do this using
<<a_api| val Eliom_service.set_exn_handler >>.
Here is the handler used by the tutorial:

<<code language="ocaml"|let _ = Eliom_service.set_exn_handler
   (fun e -> match e with
    | Eliom_common.Eliom_404 ->
        Eliom_registration.Html.send ~code:404
          (html
             (head (title (txt "")) [])
             (body [h1 [txt "Eliom tutorial"];
                    p [txt "Page not found"]]))
    | e -> fail e)
>>

===Giving configuration options to your sites

You can add your own options in the configuration file for your Web
site. For example:

<<code language="ocaml"|
    <eliommodule module="//path_to///yourmodule.cmo">
      <youroptions> ...
    </eliommodule>
>>

Use <<a_api| val Eliom_config.get_config >> during the initialization
of your module to get the data between <<span class="code"|<eliom>>>
and <<span class="code"|</eliom>>>.

<<wip|
 Warning: parsing these data is very basic for now.
 That feature will be improved in the future.
>>

===@@id="static_linking"@@Static linking of Eliom modules

From version 1.2, it is possible to link extensions and Eliom modules
<<a_manual project="ocsigenserver" chapter="staticlink"|statically>>.
But this is not straightforward.  For Eliom modules, service
registration and option settings must be delayed until the
configuration file is read. To create a statically linkable Eliom
module, use function
<<a_api| val Eliom_service.register_eliom_module >>.
It takes as parameters the name of the module and the initialization
function that will be called once the module is initialized in the
configuration file. That function should register the module services
(and possibly call <<a_api| val Eliom_config.get_config >> if the module has
configuration options).

<<wip|How to improve this and this easier to use?>>

To initialize the module from the configuration file, use the syntax:

{{{
<eliommodule name="//name//"> ... </eliommodule>
}}}

(or <<span class="code"|<eliommodule name="//name//"> ... </eliom> >>)
which is equivalent to:

{{{
<eliommodule module="//name.cmxs//"> ... </eliommodule>
}}}

(or <<span class="code"|<eliommodules module="//name.cmxs//"> ... </eliom> >>)

with the exception that it does not load the module using <<span
class="code"|Dynlink>>, but calls the initialization function.\\

You can use functions such as
<<a_api| val Eliom_state.create_volatile_table >>
that needs information about the site (here, volatile tables are
associated to a site), only during a request or during the
initialization phase of the server.

If you want to use this kind of function before the initialization
phase, for example if your module is linked statically with the
server, you must call these function using function
<<a_api| val Eliom_service.register_eliom_module >>.
(One solution is to use a lazy value to delay the creation of the
table, and force that value from the registration function).


===@@id="extensions"@@Advanced use: create an extension for the server that access Eliom's data

If you want an Ocsigen extension with access to Eliom's data (for
example if you want an extension that will register some services),
you can use the function
<<a_api| val Eliom_extension.register_eliom_extension >>
to register the function that will generate the
<<a_api project="ocsigenserver" | type Ocsigen_extensions.answer>>.

<<wip|Add more details about this>>

==@@id="config"@@Global configuration options

Here are Eliom's options you can use in configuration files.

===Timeouts

<<wip|Revoir les timeouts pour client processes et groupes>>

State timeouts can be set either inside tag
{{{<extension findlib-package="eliom.server"/>}}} (default value
for all sites), or inside a {{{<eliom/>}}} tag (default for one site).

Timeouts can also be modified programmatically using functions like
{{{Eliom_state.set_global_volatile_timeout}}}, but by default these
functions will not override configuration files.
(see module <<a_api| module Eliom_state >> for other functions).
Thus, a Web site can set its own defaults and the user can still
override them from the configuration file.  If you want to set a
timeout programmatically even if it has been modified in a
configuration file, use the optional parameter
{{{~override_configfile:true}}}.

Timeouts can be set either for all scopes hierarchies, for one precise
hierarchy, or for the default scope hierarchy.  To do this
programmatically, use the optional parameter {{{~scope}}}.
In a configuration file, use the optional attribute
{{{hierarchyname}}} (where an empty string value means default hierarchy).
If this attribute is absent, the timeout will affect all
states for which no other default has been set. The
{{{hierarchyname}}} attribute exists only inside an {{{<eliom/>}}} tag
(and not inside {{{<extension findlib-package="eliom.server"/>}}}).

The level attribute can take values {{{session}}} (browser)
or {{{clientprocess}}} (tab).

* {{{<volatiletimeout value="30" [hierarchyname=""] [level="session"]/>}}}
  The default timeout for
  volatile (in memory) states (value in seconds).
  {{{value="infinity"}}} means that the state will
  never expire.
  Note that each eliom module can set its own
  default, that will override this one.
* {{{<persistenttimeout value="7200"/>}}}
  Idem for persistent state data
* {{{<datatimeout value="30"  [hierarchyname=""] [level="session"]/>}}}
     Like {{{<timeout>}}}, but for in memory data
     states only
     (not service states).
* {{{<servicetimeout value="30" [hierarchyname=""] [level="session"]/>}}}
  Like {{{<timeout>}}}, but for service states only
     (not in memory data states).

===Garbage collector of states and services

These options can appear inside tag
{{{<extension findlib-package="eliom.server"/>}}}.
For now, it cannot be set for each site independently
(tell us if you need that).

* {{{<sessiongcfrequency value="30"/>}}}
     Time between two garbage
     collections of sessions, in seconds (default
     3600). The value {{{"infinity"}}} means no GC of session.
* {{{<persistentsessiongcfrequency value="86400"/>}}}
     Time between two
     garbage collections of persistent sessions,
     in seconds (default 86400.). The value {{{"infinity"}}} means
      no GC of session.
* {{{<servicesessiongcfrequency value="3600"/>}}}
     Like {{{<sessiongcfrequency>}}},
     but for service sessions only
* {{{<datasessiongcfrequency value="3600"/>}}}
     Like {{{<sessiongcfrequency>}}},
     but for "in memory data" sessions only

===Limiting the number of sessions or coservices

To fight denial of service, Eliom limits the number of sessions
and the number of dynamic coservices. Without these limitations, it would
be possible for an attacker to open repeatedly lots of sessions,
or creating new services (for example CSRF safe coservices can create lots
of coservices when you reload repeatedly a page). When the limit is reached,
it is still possible to open a new session or create a new service, but the
oldest session or services disappear (the one that has not been used
for the longest time).

====Limiting sessions
First of all, there is a limitation of the number of sessions in a
session group. A typical use is when a user opens several
sessions from several computers. All the sessions belong to the same
group (the group name is usually the user name).
The limit is usually small (5 sessions per group by default).
This limit is implemented for all kinds of sessions (service session,
volatile and persistent data sessions). For persistent sessions, the
implementation is not very efficient for very large limits.

It is highly recommended to use session groups when possible.

If you can't use session groups, the number of sessions is limited
by sub network for volatile sessions (service sessions and data sessions).
The limitation is larger (default 1 million). The limit must be large enough.
For instance, if the server is behind a reverse proxy, all incoming requests
will come from the same IP address. Limiting by sub network instead of by
IP address prevents attacks even when the attacker has a whole sub network
available. The default mask for sub networks is {{{/16}}} for IPv4
and {{{/56}}} for IPv6.

Some figures: if 1 session takes 1000 bytes (data + tables etc),
1 million sessions take 1 GB. If somebody opens 1000 sessions per second,
then it will take 1000 s (16 minutes) to reach 1000000.
It means that regular users will have their sessions closed
after 16 minutes of inactivity if they share their sub network with
someone doing an attack (or if the server is behind a proxy).

For persistent sessions, there is no limitation per sub network for now.
1 billion sessions take 1 TB. If somebody opens 1000 sessions per second,
then it will take 1 million s (16000 minutes = 266 h = 11 days)
to reach 1TB.

====Limiting services

The number of anonymous coservices is limited by session
or by sub network if the service is registered in the global table.
Default values: 1000 for one session, and 500000 for one subnet.

Note that there is no limitation of named coservices or regular services.
It is not a good practice to allow the creation of too much services
of this kinds dynamically.


====How to set limits

The limits and the subnet mask can be set programmatically by each module
(for example to adapt the values to the size of session data) or in the
configuration file
(for instance, to adapt the values to the size of memory or network
configuration)
(see module  <<a_api| module Eliom_state >>).
By default, functions like
{{{Eliom_state.set_default_max_volatile_sessions_per_group}}}
will not override a value set in the configuration file
(but if you use {{{~override_configfile:true}}}).
Thus, a Web site can set its own defaults and the user can still
override them from the configuration file.

The configuration file options can be set either inside the tag
{{{<extension findlib-package="eliom.server"/>}}}
(global configuration), or inside the {{{<eliom/>}}} tag
(configuration for each site). But the limits always are for one
site (that is: a global limit value of 10 means 10 for each Eliom site).

The syntax is:
* {{{<maxvolatilesessionspergroup value="10"/>}}}
* {{{<maxservicesessionspergroup value="10"/>}}}
* {{{<maxdatasessionspergroup value="10"/>}}}
* {{{<maxpersistentsessionspergroup value="10"/>}}}
* {{{<maxvolatilesessionspersubnet value="500000"/>}}}
* {{{<maxservicesessionspersubnet value="500000"/>}}}
* {{{<maxdatasessionspersubnet value="500000"/>}}}
* {{{<maxanonymouscoservicespersession value="1000"/>}}}
* {{{<maxanonymouscoservicespersubnet value="500000"/>}}}
* {{{<ipv4subnetmask value="255.255.128.0"/>}}}
* {{{<ipv6subnetmask value="ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff::"/>}}}

=== Application script attributes

One can choose to set the {{{defer}}} or {{{async}}} attributes of the
script element referencing the application code, so that HTML
rendering is not blocked while the script is downloaded.

The syntax is:
* {{{<applicationscript defer="true" async="false"/>}}}

Both attributes are optional and default to {{{false}}}.

=== WebAssembly support

Eliom applications can be compiled to WebAssembly using {{{wasm_of_ocaml}}}.
When enabled, the server generates a detection script that automatically
loads the WASM version if the browser supports WebAssembly, with fallback
to JavaScript otherwise.

The syntax is:
* {{{<wasm enabled="true"/>}}}

The {{{enabled}}} attribute is optional and defaults to {{{true}}}.

When WASM support is enabled, compile your client code with:
{{{
dune build client/myapp.bc.js client/myapp.bc.wasm.js
}}}

The WASM assets must be copied to your static directory for serving.

=== Serving global data through a distinct URL

When an Eliom program is initiated client-side, it needs to receive
some global data from the server (that are persistent from request to
request). This data is normally included in the HTML page sent by the
server. Alternatively, it can be served through a separate
request. This is more efficient as it allows this state to be
serialized by the server only once, and cached by the clients (or
possibly a CDN if your server is running behind one), but the client
will receive stale data if global data changes over time.

The syntax to activate this option is the following:
* {{{<cacheglobaldata path="path" cache="604800"/>}}}

All attributes are optional. The {{{path}}} option can be use to
indicate the path below which the JavaScript file providing the global
data is served. The default path is the empty path. This script name
is the MD5 checksum of its contents (with a {{{.js}}} suffix). Thus,
it can be safely cached and is unlikely to conflict with any other
service. The caching duration, in seconds, is set using the
{{{cache}}} attribute. It defaults to zero (no caching).

When the application script defer attribute is set (see just above),
global data are also loaded in a deferred way.

==Per site configuration options

=== Disabling XHR-links

By default, all links (##a##, ##form##) of an Eliom application are performed
by Eliom's ##change_page## machinery, unless they are created with the
##~xhr:false## option.

You can change this default by adding the attribute ##xhr-links## to
the content of the configuration of the Eliom module:
{{{
  <eliom ... xhr-links="no" />
}}}
Then, all links will perform a normal HTTP request unless explicitely
created with the ##~xhr:true## option.

This value can also be set through function
<<a_api | val Eliom_config.set_default_links_xhr >>.
