
= Eliom's Distillery==

The easiest way to initialize, compile, and run an Ocsigen/Eliom
project is to use {{{eliom-distillery}}}.

{{{eliom-distillery}}} is self-documenting (refer to
{{{eliom-distillery -help}}} and the generated {{{README}}}), but here
is a bit information on how to work with it.

<<outline depth="2"| <<header| **Table of contents** >> >>



=== Project Initialization

{{{eliom-distillery}}} creates projects from templates.
To see all available templates, you can use
<<code language="shell"|
$ eliom-distillery -list-templates
>>

Template "client-server.basic" create a simple project (Dune-based build system,
configuration file and main service).
Alternatively, you might want to use the legacy "basic.ppx" template,
with a Makefile-based build system.

To create your project, do:

<<code language="shell"|
$ eliom-distillery -name <name> -template client-server.basic [-target-directory <dir>]
>>

This creates a project named {{{<name>}}} from the {{{"client-server.basic"}}}
template in the directory {{{<dir>}}} or {{{<name>}}} by default.
The project name should be a valid name for an OCaml compilation unit.
The project directory contains the following files

 * {{{<name>.eliom}}} \\
   This is your initial source file.
   All Eliom files (*.eliom, *.eliomi) in this directory are
   automatically considered.  To add a .ml/.mli file to your project,
   add it to the variable SERVER_FILES or CLIENT_FILES in
   {{{Makefile.options}}}.

 * {{{static/}}} \\
   The content of this folder is statically served. It contains
   initially a basic CSS file for your project.

 * {{{Makefile.options}}} \\
   Configure your project here!

 * {{{name.conf.in}}} \\
   This file is a template for the configuration file for
   ocsigenserver. You will rarely need to edit it: it can be
   personalized through variables in {{{Makefile.options}}}.
   In particular, this way, the installation rules and the
   configuration files remains coherent.

 * {{{Makefile}}} \\
   This contains all rules necessary to build, test, and run your
   Eliom application. You should avoid modifying it. See below for the
   relevant targets.

 * {{{README}}} \\
   An explanation of how to compile, test, install, and run your
   application

=== Compilation & Running: Read the README

You can just run
<<code language="shell"|
$ make test.byte
>>
or
<<code language="shell"|
$ make test.opt
>>
to compile your project and run ocsigenserver with it.

Please refer to the generated README file for further hints
on how to work with your project.

=== Using other templates

If you want to start from a more complete or more specific template,
you can get other templates from the internet, such as
"ocsigen-start". You can either install these templates into eliom's
own directory (this is what their installer generally does), or, if
doing so is not practical, you can use the {{{ELIOM_DISTILLERY_PATH}}}
environment variable to point to your templates. This environment
variable is a colon-separated list of absolute paths (that is, {{{export ELIOM_DISTILLERY_PATH=/usr/lib/template1:/usr/local/lib/template2}}}).

A template's name is its directory basename ({{{template1}}} and
{{{template2}}} for the preceding example). If you want to create a
new project based on {{{template1}}}, you can use

<<code language="shell"|
$ eliom-distillery -name example -template template1
>>

=== Write other templates

You can also write your own templates and install them by using the
previous described method.

By default, {{{eliom-distillery}}} copies all files in the template
directory. If you want to ignore some files, you can list them in the
special file {{{.eliomignore}}}.

For some templates, e.g., the one of {{{Ocsigen Start}}}, some project
names are reserved to avoid conflicts. For a new template, you need to
list all reserved project names in the special file
{{{.eliomreserve}}}.

{{{eliom-distillery}}} also replaces {{{%%%PROJECT_NAME%%%}}} (resp.
{{{%%%MODULE_NAME%%%}}}) by the project name (resp. by the project
name with the first letter capitalized).

For examples, see pre-defined templates like {{{client-server.basic}}}, {{{basic.ppx}}} and
{{{os.pgocaml}}}.
