=@@id="server_generating_html"@@Generating HTML pages=

Ocsigen provides several ways to generate and type xhtml pages.

* The default technique to produce HTML5 pages using Eliom is the
   <<a_api | module Eliom_content.Html5.F >> and
   <<a_api | module Eliom_content.Html5.D >>
   module. It is the only one supported for client side Eliom programs.
   This module provides a typing based on OCaml's polymorphic variants,
   which ensures at compile time, that the pages you will generate will
   respect the recommendations of the W3C (or be very close).
   There also exists another module, <<a_api | module Eliom_content.Xhtml.F >>
   that implements XHTML 1.1.
* It is also possible to use a syntax extension to write your pages with the
   usual XHTML syntax. This solution is also typed with polymorphic variants
   and is compatible with the previous one.
* The most powerful typing of pages is done with OcamlDuce.
  To take benefit of it, use OCamlDuce instead of OCaml.
* You can also choose to generate untyped html as text.

===Html5 and Xhtml===

The types in OCaml closest to XML types are //polymorphic variants//.
Ocsigen uses them to provide a module with very good HTML5 typing.
The full documentation is available <<a_api text="in
the TyXML documentation" project="tyxml" | module Html5.M >>.
<<wip|put it here (?!)>>

===XHTML syntax extension===

<<wip|Compatibility with HTML5?>>

Ocsigen also has a syntax extension for OCaml that allows you to write pages
using HTML syntax (but you are free not to use it).
This is convenient for example if
you want to include (parts of) HTML pages that have been
created by third party.
To choose actual XML-implementation you have to provide a module named [Html5]
(or [Xhtml] or [Svg] respectively):

For example, the following code:
{{{

module Xhtml = Xhtml.F (* NB this is TyXML's Xhtml; could also be Eliom_content.Xhtml.F *)

<< <html>
     <head><title></title></head>
     <body><h1>plop</h1></body>
   </html> >>
}}}
is a caml value of type {{{Xhtmltypes5.xhtml Xhtml.M.elt}}}.

To compile a module containing this syntax, you need the camlp4 preprocessor:
{{{
ocamlc -I /path_to/ocsigen/
 -pp "camlp4o /path_to/ocsigen/xhtmlsyntax.cma -loc loc"
 -c your_module.ml
}}}
You can insert OCaml expressions of type {{{'a Xhtml.M.elt}}} inside html using {{{$...$}}}, like this:
{{{
let oc = << <em>Ocsigen</em> >> in
<< <p>$oc$ will revolutionize web programming.</p> >>
}}}
<<wip| remove \ before $, _ in code, everywhere in pdf version!!!!!!!!!! >>

You can insert OCaml expressions of type string inside html using
{{{$str:... $}}}, like this:
{{{
let i = 4 in
<< <p>i is equal to $str:string_of_int i$</p> >>
}}}
If you want to use a dollar in your page, just write it twice.

You can write a list of xhtml expressions using the syntax {{{<:xmllist<...>>}}}, for example:
{{{
<:xmllist< <p>hello</p> <div></div> >>
}}}
Here are some other examples showing what you can do:
{{{
<< <ul class=$ulclass$ $list:other_attrs$>
     $first_il$
     $list:items$
   </ul> >>
}}}
Warning: lists antiquotations are allowed only at the end (before a closing tag). For example, the following is not valid:
{{{
<< <ul $list:other_attrs$ class=$ulclass$>
     $list:items$
     $last_il$
   </ul> >>
}}}
The syntax extension is not allowed in patterns for now.

//Warning:// The two syntaxes are not equivalent for typing.
 Using the syntax extension will do less checking.
 For example the following code is accepted but not valid
 regarding HTML5 standard (because <<span class="code"|<head>>>
 must contain a title):

<<code language="ocaml"|
  << <html>
     <head></head>
     <body><h1>plop</h1></body>
   </html> ~>>
>>

We recommend you use the functions from <<a_api project="tyxml"
| module Html5.F>>, as you will (almost) always get valid HTML5. Use
the syntax extension for example to enclose already created pieces of
HTML, and check your pages validity with the
[[http://validator.w3.org/| W3C validator]].




===OCamlduce===

OCaml's type system is not powerful enough to type XML. The OCamlduce
manual says: //"The goal of the OCamlDuce project is to extend the
OCaml language with features to make it easier to write safe and
efficient complex applications that need to deal with XML documents.
In particular, it relies on a notion of types and patterns to
guarantee statically that all the possible input documents are
correctly processed, and that only valid output documents are
produced."//

Ocamlduce's full documentation is available from
[[http://www.cduce.org/ocaml.html|here]].

If OCamlDuce is installed on your system, it is now possible to use
it instead of Xhtml.M
to typecheck your pages. You will get a stronger type checking
and more flexibility (easier to use other XML types, to parse
incoming XML data, etc.).

However, Ocamlduce is not compatible with Camlp4 syntax extensions
and client server Eliom applications support only HTML5 (for now).


To use it, make sure that you have Eliom compiled with OCamlDuce
support. Then dynlink <<span class="code"|ocamlduce.cma>> and <<span
class="code"|eliomduce.cma>> from the configuration file (after <<span
class="code"|eliom.cma>>).  Then use <<a_api | module Eliom_duce.Xhtml >>
instead of <<a_api | module Eliom_registration.Xhtml>> to register your pages.

Here is an example:
<<code language="ocaml"|
let s =
  Eliom_duce.Xhtml.register_service
    ~path:[""]
    ~get_params:unit
    (fun () () ->
      Lwt.return
        {{ <html>
             [<head> [<title> ""]
              <body> [<h1> "Page type checked by OCamlDuce"]] }})
>>



===Text XHTML===

The last possibility is to use untyped xhtml. Just build strings
containing your pages. Here is an example:

<<code language="ocaml"|let coucoutext =
  Eliom_registration.HtmlText.register_service
    ~path:["coucoutext"]
    ~get_params:Eliom_parameter.unit
    (fun () () ->
      Lwt.return
        ("<html>n'importe quoi "^
         (Eliom_registration.HtmlText.a coucou "clic" ())^
         "</html>"))
>>

