= Eliom Camlp4 syntax extension

Eliom uses syntax extensions to make the development of client-server
applications easier.

In order to use these syntax extensions, use the file extension {{{.eliom}}}
for the implementation and {{{.eliomi}}} for the corresponding interface.
By using this naming conventions, {{{eliomc}}} and {{{js_of_eliom}}}
will use Eliom's syntax extension automatically.

We provide two different syntax extensions,
<<a_manual chapter="ppx-syntax"|one based on PPX>>
(which we recommend) and an older one based on Camlp4. This manual
page documents our Camlp4 syntax extension.

<<outline depth="2"| <<header| **Table of contents** >> >>


== Server, client, and shared-sections

Server, client, and shared-sections make possible
to write the code of the server and client parts in the same
source file, and also to defined sections of the code that are common
to the two sides.
Some special brackets make possible to distinguish between
client and server code:

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  ...
}}
>>

or no brackets for //server side code//,

<<code language="ocaml"|
{client{
  ...
}}
>>

for //client side code//, and

<<code language="ocaml"|
{shared{
  ...
}}
>>

for some code that is //common to client and server parts//.

This means that the corresponding sections are compiled only for the
server and/or the client program.

== Injecting server values into the client code

Structuring the source code of your application into client and
server sections wouldn't be of much use as-is; we need a way
to exchange data between these parts in a way which reflects the
asymmetries between the client and the server parts, i.e. that the
client program is sent and initialized by the server program.

Thus, to ease the direct exchange of values between server and client,
it is possible to access any server-side, top-level variable in a
subsequent client section by just prefixing it with a %-sign. This is
called //injecting// a server value into the client:

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  let v = Random.int 100
}}
{client{
  ... %v ... (* Usage of server side [v] on the client /
                injection of [v] *)
}}
>>

The server side value is injected once and for all when the page is sent
for the first time. There is no automatic request to the server when the
client tries to access this value. In particular, if the server side
value is mutable, a copy is sent to the client.

== Server side client values

On the other hand, it is possible to declare and deal with
arbitrary client values in the server program. Those are just
arbitrary expressions of client-side code declared inside double curly
braces:

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  ... {typ{ expr }} ...
}}
>>

If {{{expr}}} has type {{{typ}}} on the client, the resulting client
value has the type {{{typ client_value}}} which is //abstract on the
server//. But once it is sent to the client, it evaluates to the value
of {{{expr}}} having type {{{typ}}}.

In some cases where inference is not sufficient, {{{eliomc}}} will emit
a warning indicating than this type annotation is needed.

==== Injections

Again, variables from the context of the client value may be injected
to it by prefixing them with a %-sign. It is for example possible to
inject a parameter into a request client value:

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  let () = My_app.create
    ~path:(Eliom_service.Path path)
    ~meth:(Eliom_service.Get (Eliom_parameter.string "name"))
    (fun name () ->
       ignore {unit{ Eliom_lib.alert "Hello %s!" %name }};
       Lwt.return html)
}}
>>

The pattern used in this example is very common to ask the client-side
program to execute a piece of code after receiving the page.


====@@id="evaluation"@@ Evaluation

Server side client values may occur in a //request// position,
i.e. they are created during the processing of a request:

<<code language="ocaml"|
  let _ =
    My_app.create
      ~path:(Eliom_service.Path path)
      ~meth:(Eliom_service.Get get_params)
      (fun _ _ ->
         let v = {Js.string{ Js.string "another client side string" }} in
         Lwt.return html)
>>

Or they occur either in a //global position//, i.e. they are created
while launching the server:

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  let v = {Js.string{ Js.string "a client side string" }}
}}
>>

All global client values are sent with the initial request of a client
process.  They are evaluated during the initialization of the client
program, i.e. //before// setting up the document. This is necessary
in order to safely inject them into the next client-section.

Thus, if you want to refer to the DOM in global client values (e.g. by
injecting variables holding HTML-elements) you must be sure to delay
this by using <<a_api subproject="client"|val Eliom_client.onload>>.

Request client values, however, are sent with the next response to the
client and evaluated //after// setting up the (possibly) sent document.

==== Sending client values

There are several ways how a server side client value can be sent
to the client, accessing its concrete value.  Firstly, the most basic
one is by just injecting it to another client value:

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  let _ =
    My_app.create
      ~path:(Eliom_service.Path path)
      ~meth:(Eliom_service.Get get_params)
      (fun _ _ ->
         let v = {int{ 42 }} in (* v is abstract *)
         ignore {unit{
           Eliom_lib.alert "It's %i!" %v (* %v is 42 here ! *)
         }};
         Lwt.return html
>>

In the above example, first a client value {{{v}}} (with the abstract
type {{{int client_value}}}) is declared. Then a second client of type
{{{unit}}} value is created. The injection {{{%v}}} has then the concrete
value {{{42}}}.

Here, the second client value is ignored; however, it will be
evaluated on client side, executing the side effect, just because
it has been created. A very neat way to do client side programming
inside the service handler!

Secondly, client values of type {{{(Dom_html.event Js.t -> unit) client_value}}}
can be used as event handler in the construction of Eliom HTML
elements:

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  let service_handler get post =
    let onclick = {{ fun ev -> Eliom_lib.alert "Thanks." }} in
    let div = div ~a:[a_onclick onclick] [txt "Click me!"] in
    Lwt.return (html head [div])
}}
>>

Note here, how the type annotation of a client value can be omitted if
the type of the client value is inferable from //its usage in the server code//
(as the argument to {{{on_click}}} in the example).

Thirdly, global client values can also be injected into the client
section.

== Restrictions to injections into the client values/sections

It is not possible to send values containing closures that way.
There are two executables: one server-side, and one client-side,
and closures just contain a pointer to the code.
Extra code is never sent dynamically over the network.
This means that unforced lazy values, objects, or
anything containing functions can't be sent.
Functions must be defined on the side(s) where they will run.
Most of the time, you can do all you want by using client values or
server functions.
Some Eliom types use a
specific mechanism to circumvent this limitation. This is the case for
services, comet channels, and buses. To use this mechanism see chapter
<<a_manual chapter="clientserver-wrapping"|Wrapping values>>.

Those values are typechecked "by name": the most general type of a variable is
inferred for server side then use as a type constraint on client side.
For instance
<<code language="ocaml"|
let value = (... : t) in
let v = {typ{ ... %value ... }}
>>
can be read as
<<code language="ocaml"|
let value = (... : t) in
let v = {typ{ ... (%value: t) ... }}
>>

As client and server code are compiled separately, this means that a code like
the following would be incorrect but would typecheck.
<<code language="ocaml"|
type a = A of int
{client{ type a = A of string }}
let value = A 1 in
let v = {{ match %value with A s -> Dom_html.window##alert(Js.string s) }}
>>

Note that for some reason, it is impossible to use the {{{ {...{ }} }}} and
{{{ {{ }} }}} syntax inside a module. For {{{ {{ }} }}} you can usually
circumvent this limitation by declaring a function at toplevel with all the
{{{%variable}}} as parameters.


==@@id="implementation"@@ Technical Documentation: Implementation of the language extensions

//Do not read this section if you do not feel the urge to
dive into the implementation details of Eliom, or if you have a
weak stomach!//

This sections gives some details on the implementation of the language
extensions in Eliom.  To investigate this
in more detail, it is advisable to dump the source code for the server
or client program with with ##eliomc -c -infer## or ##js_of_eliom -c -infer##
respectively, and to refer to the API of the generated
functions in ##Eliom_syntax## on the server
and ##Eliom_client.Syntax_helpers## on the client.

=== Client values

For each occurrence of a client value ##{typ{ exp }}## with injected
variables ##v_1##, ..., ##v_n## in the source code, i.e. static
occurrence, at a location ##p##, the syntax extension registers
with ##p## as the closure ID a function

<<code language="ocaml"|
fun (v'_1, ..., v'_n) -> exp'
>>

where ##exp'## is ##exp## with occurrences of ##%v_i## replaced
by ##v'_i## where all ##v'_i## are free in ##exp##.

When a client value is then created dynamically, a client closure
is registered to be sent to the client.
It contains the closure ID, an instance ID (unique per client value), and
the tuple of injected values (sometimes known as ##args##).

On the client side, that client value datum will be used to register
an actual client value: A client closure is obtained by the specific
closure ID, and it is applied on the tuple of injected
values. Finally, the result is registered in a client value table for
that specific closure ID and instance ID.

The representation of a client value on the server side is
comprised just of the respective closure ID, and the instance
ID. When it reaches the client, it is unwrapped to the concrete
value by looking it up in the client value table mentioned before.


=== Injections

The usage of an injection registers the value under a specific
identifier on the server side. All injections are sent to the client
with the initial request as a table mapping those identifiers to
(untyped) values.

On the client-side, at the beginning of each client/shared
section, all novel injections are registered in a global table of
injections. This must be done post-hoc because client values are
unwrapped late.

The syntax extensions then generates for an injection just a lookup in
that global table for its identifier. Type constraints are generated
from the syntax extension.
