= Eliom -- the language extensions

In Eliom it possible to define the functionality of the server and the
client program at in a single source file.  The server program will
constantly run on the Web server.  The client program will run
independently in each browser tab that visits the Web site.  The
latter is started with the initial request in a browser tab and keeps
running while navigating within the Web site, across the usage of
links, forms, history, and <<a_api subproject="client"
text="page changes" | val Eliom_client.change_page>>.

Eliom provides three language extensions to OCaml to provide an
integrated development of client/server-programs, and to deal with the
mentioned asymetricity between the client- and server-program: The
partitioning of the program into client-, and server-sections, the
direct usage of server-side toplevel values in client sections, and
the declaration and handling of client values within the code for the
server.

It is advisable to read the section about <<a_manual
chapter="workflow-compilation" fragment="compilation"|compiling eliom
applications>> first.

For an outline of the implementation of those features, please refer
to the chapter on <<a_manual chapter="workflow-compilation"
fragment="implementation"|compiling eliom applications>>.

<<outline depth="1">>

==@@id="sections"@@ Sections (partitioning into client- and server-side)

The source code of an Eliom module can be partitioned on its top-level
into several //sections// to specify which code is to be compiled for
and run in the server program, in the client program, or in both.

A common OCaml module is comprised of a sequence of //structure
items//, i.e. top level declarations of variables, types, modules etc.
An Eliom module consists of a sequence of such structure items and
client, server, and shared //sections//.  The section declarations in
turn may contain any number and kind of structure items.  Code outside
of those sections is compiled for the server side only.

The sections (the latter contain code to be compiled and run on both
sides) are introduced by the following syntax and may occur in any
number or ordering:

<<code language="ocaml"|
{client{
  (* client only structure items *)
}}
...
{server{
  (* server only structure item *)
}}
...
{shared{
  (* structure items for server and client *)
}}
(* Code outside of section is compiled only to the server program *)
...
>>

Declarations in the shared section are compiled separately for both
the client //and// for the server program.  They may refer only to
declarations which are available on the client-side //and// on the
server side.

Note well, that they will refer possibly to different implementations:
<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  let output str = print_endline str (*1*)
{client{
  let output str = Dom_html.window##alert(str) (*2*)
}}
{shared{
  let () = output "GUGA!"
  (* output refers to (*1*) when compiled for the server, to (*2*) when
     compiled to the client! *)
}}
>>

== Semantics

Sections as-it act as a filter on the original source code during
compilation: Only the structure items on the top-level, the
server-section, and the shared-sections are compiled to the server
program (or bytecode object files) by ##eliomc##. And only the
structure items in client- and shared-sections are compiled to the
client program (or bytecode object files) by ##js_of_eliom##.

All top-level expressions are evaluated //early// while launching the
program. In the server program they are thus evaluated while launching
the server. //No request information is available at that time//.

In the client program, top-level expressions are evaluated early in
the initialization phase of the client process, particulary //before
the DOM is in place//. This means, that you cannot do any DOM
manipulation or access HTML-elements with <<a_api text="DOM semantics"
| module Eliom_content.Html.D>>. However, you can postpone that by
<<a_api subproject="client" | val Eliom_client.onload>>.

==@@id="injections"@@ Injections (in the client-section)

Eliom permits the direct usage of top-level server-side variables, and
also of arbitrary expressions, in the client sections. Such a usage is
called //injection//. It is also supported inside a
[[#sharedinjection|shared section]].

Assuming you have a top-level variable ##v## defined on the server,
its injection in the client section is introduced by prefixing it with
a percent-sign ##%v##. It then holds the value of the server-side
variable ##v## //at the time of the initial request of the client
process//.

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  let service = ... (* Server-side declaration of a service. *)
}}
{client{
  let f () = Eliom_client.change_page ~service:%service ()
  (* Refer to the server-side variable within the client section! *)
}}
>>

It is also possible to inject an arbitrary server-side
expression ##exp## in a client section. The injection is introduced by prefixing
it with a percent-sign and parentheses, ##%(exp)##. Whenever an
initial request of a client process is handled from the server, the
expression ##exp## is evaluated. The injection then holds the
resulting value in that specific client process.

<<code language="ocaml"|
{client{
  let () =
    Eliom_lib.alert "Time of the first request on the server: %d"
      %(Unix.gettimeofday ())
}}
>>

Note well that the value of an injection is //not updated// when the
injected value on the server changes. However, you may inject reactive
signals (cf. <<a_api subproject="server" | val
Eliom_react.S.Down.of_react>>) to achieve the behavior of a client
side values which updates alongside with a server correspondent.

===@@id="sharedinjection"@@ In a shared section

Injections are also supported in the shared sections of an Eliom
source file. When compiling the shared section to the client, the
semantics is as described. However, when compiling an injection of a
variable to the server program, it becomes just a new name of that
variable. I.e. it will actually reflect changes made to the original
variable.

However, the same scoping rules hold for injections into the client-
and shared-sections.

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  let v = "server" (*1*)
}}
{shared{
  let v = "shared" (*2*)
  let () = assert (%v = "server")
  (* %v refers to (*1*), also when compiling to the server,
     i.e. when (*2*) is in scope as v here *)
}}
>>

==@@id="clientvalues"@@ Client values (in the server-section)

The notion //server-side client values// allows it to declare and deal
with client values within the server-section (and is also supported in
the [[wiki("eliom"):doc#sharedclientvalues|shared section]]).

A client-value may be declared in the server section as

<<code language="ocaml"|
  ... {typ{ exp }} ...
>>

where ##exp## is an expression on the client side, which means it is
compiled only for the client program, and may make use of any
libraries available on the client, and where ##exp## has type ##typ##
on the client side.

The hole client value then has type ##typ Eliom_client_value.t##.

A value of type ##typ Eliom_client_value.t## is //abstract on the
server// (cf. <<a_api subproject="server" | type
Eliom_client_value.t>> (server)).  But once it is sent to the client
it becomes the value to which the expression ##exp## evaluated on the
client side (cf. <<a_api subproject="server" | type
Eliom_client_value.t>> (client)).

A client value expression is an arbitrary OCaml expression, but may
additionaly contain //injections of server variables//,
(cf. [[#injections|Injections into the client section]]). A
variable ##v## in the scope of a client-value expression can be
injected by prefixing it with a percent sign, ##%v##. A server-side
expression ##exp## can be injected by ##%(exp)##.

Note well, that the injection of a server side client-value ##v## of
type ##typ Eliom_client_value.t## results in a value ##%v## of
type ##typ##. Thus, the value of the client value becomes concrete.

The other way to make a client value concrete is to send it to the
client, e.g. by using it in the HTML tree sent from the server in an
Eliom application-service, or by sending it as-it in an Ocaml-service.

For convenience, the indication of the type of a client value may be
ommitted if it is derivible from its //usage// in the server code:

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  ...
  let onclick = {{ fun ev -> Eliom_lib.alert "ohyeah!" }} in
  Eliom.content.Html.F.(div ~a:[a_onclick onclick] [txt "click me!"])
  ...
>>

Here, the function ##a_onclick## has type ##(#Dom_html.mouseEvent Js.t
-> unit) -> [> `OnClick ] Eliom_content.Html.attrib##; this
determines the type of the client value ##onclick## sufficiently.

===@@id="clientvaluesemantic"@@ Semantics

The point in time of the evaluation of the expression of a client
value (which also includes the occurrence of its side effects) depends
on the context of the creation of the client value on the server. In
Eliom, global client values are distinguished from request client
values.

Client values created while launching the server, i.e. while
evaluating the top-level declarations of the server program, are
termed //global client values//. The expressions of global client
values are evaluated early in the initialization phase of the client
process. Consider the following example to get an intuition of the
order of evaluation of global client values; it will print the numbers
1 to 5 to the browser's console consecutively.

<<code language="ocaml"|
{client{
  let () = Eliom_lib.debug "1"
}}
{server{
  let f n = ignore {unit { Eliom_lib.debug "%d" %n }}
  let () =
    ignore {unit{ Eliom_lib.debug "2" }};
    ignore {unit{ f 3 }};
    ignore {unit{ f 4 }}
}}
{client{
  let () = Eliom_lib.debug "5"
}}
>>

Client values which are evaluated during the processing of a request
are termed //request client values//. The expressions of request
client values are evaluated after receiving the corresponding request
on the client in the order of their occurrence on the server. In
requests which change the content of the page withing the application
(originating from a service of the <<a_api subproject="server"|module
Eliom_registration.App>>), the expressions are evaluated //after the
content has changed//. That way they may refer to the new DOM.

If a client value is created outside of the initialization of the
server program and also outside of the processing of a request, the
exception {% <<a_api subproject="server"|exception
Eliom_client_value.t_creation_invalid_context>> %} is raised.

===@@id="sharedclientvalues"@@ In a shared section

Client values are also supported in the shared-section of an Eliom
program. They are then just directly compiled into the surrounding
code. However, the same scoping rules apply to them:

<<code language="ocaml"|
{server{
  let v = "server" (*1*)
}}
{shared{
  let v = "shared" (*2*)
  let () = {unit{ assert (%v = "server")
  (* Although v refers to (*2*) here *)
}}
>>
