=Eliom PPX syntax extension

The eliom syntax extension allows to write, in one file, both the
client and server part of your application. The extension is
automatically enabled by the {{{eliomc}}} and {{{js_of_eliom}}}
compilers on {{{.eliom}}} and {{{.eliomi}}} files.

For the Camlp4 syntax extension, see
<<a_manual chapter="clientserver-language" | here >>.

The extensions presented here are also available with the {{{eliom.}}}
prefix.

==Sections

The location of code execution is specified by section annotations. We
can specify that a declaration is performed on the server, or on the
client:

<<code language="ocaml"|
[%%server
  let s = ...
]

[%%client
  let c = ...
]
>>

Some constructions have a shortcut:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let%client c = ...
>>

Finally, it's also possible to start a section for the rest of the file:

<<code language="ocaml"|
[%%server.start]
let s = ..
>>

In {{{.eliomi}}} files, only the last version is available.

Sections are only available at top level and cannot be nested.

===Shared sections

Shared sections are also available for code that should be on the
client and on the server.

<<code language="ocaml"|
let%shared sh = ...
>>

This is equivalent to duplicating the code in a client and a server
section.

==Fragments

A client-side expression can be included inside a server section, and
the server can thereafter refer to it: an expression placed inside
{{{[%client ... ]}}} will be computed on the client when it receives the
page; but the eventual client-side value of the expression can be
manipulated as a black box on the server.

<<code language="ocaml"|
let%server x = [%client 1 + 3 ]
>>

For example, here, the expression {{{1 + 3}}} will be evaluated on the
client, but it’s possible to refer server-side to the future value of
this expression (for example, put it in a list). The value of a client
fragment cannot be accessed on the server.

In this case, {{{x}}} has type {{{int fragment}}}.  Eliom can't always
infer the type of fragments. In this case, you may annotate the type:
{{{[%client ( ... : <type> ) ]}}}.

Client fragments cannot be nested.

===Shared fragments

It is also possible to use shared fragments.
<<code language="ocaml"|
let%server x =  [%shared ...]
>>

It will produce values of type
<<a_api subproject="server"|type Eliom_shared.Value.t>>.

Shared fragments can be nested and can contain client fragments.

==Injections and escaped values

Values that have been computed on the server can be used on the client
by prefixing them with a percent symbol {{{~%}}}. We call this an
//injection//.

<<code language="ocaml"|
let%server s = 1 + 2
let%client c = ~%s + 1
>>

Here, the expression {{{1 + 2}}} is evaluated and bound to variable
{{{s}}} on the server.  The resulting value {{{3}}} is transferred to
the client together with the Web page, then the expression
{{{~%s + 1}}} is computed client-side.  An injection makes it possible to
access client-side a client fragment which has been specified on the
server:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let%server x = [%client 1 + 3 ]
let%client c = 3 + ~%x
>>

The value inside the client fragment is extracted by {{{~%x}}}, whose
value is {{{4}}} here.

==Restrictions

It is not possible to use injections on values containing a
closure. This includes lazy values, objects, or anything containing
functions. You can use either
<<a_api subproject="server"|type Eliom_client.server_function>> ({{{let%rpc}}})
and client or shared fragments to circumvent this limitation.

To extend and customize the serialization from client to server, see
chapter <<a_manual chapter="clientserver-wrapping"|Wrapping values>>.

==Note about evaluation

Regardless of the construction used and their combination, there is
only one communication from server to client, when the Web page is
sent. This is due to the fact that client fragments are not executed
immediately when encountered inside server code.  The intuitive
semantic is the following: client code is not executed when
encountered, instead it is registered for later execution, once the
Web page has been sent to the client. Then all the client code is
executed in the order it was encountered on the server.
