= Programming client-server applications with Eliom

<<outline depth="2"| <<header| **Table of contents** >> >>

== General principles
=== What is a client/server Eliom application

An Eliom application is a distributed application that runs partly on the
server, partly on a browser. The program is fully written in OCaml, with
a syntax extension to distinguish between server and client code.
Both parts are extracted during the compilation process, the server part
is compiled as usual for an Eliom website, and the client part is compiled
to Javascript to be run in the browser.

For developing an Eliom application, we recommend that you use our
<<a_manual chapter="ppx-syntax"|PPX syntax extension>>.

An interesting feature of Eliom applications is that the client side process
does not stop when you click on a link or send a form, and it is possible to
keep the traditional Web interaction (with URLs, bookmarks, back button, etc).
For example if the page is playing music, it won't stop when the user continue
his visit on the Web site.

Client side parts are using <<a_manual project="lwt"|Lwt>> for concurrency, making possible
to have concurrent programs in the browser very easily.

As both parts are implemented in OCaml, it is very easy to use client side
OCaml data on server side, and vice-versa. Eliom handle the communication
between client and server automatically in both direction. For example
it possible to use a server-side variable in the client program.

Eliom also implements an "HTTP-push" mechanism, allowing the server
to send messages to a client.

Client-side parts of the program can use most Eliom features, exactly
as usual, for example to create HTML, or links, forms from services.

On server side, it is possible to save data (some state) for each client
process (that is, one tab in a browser),
simply by using Eliom references with scope {{{`Client_process}}}.
You can register services for one client process, or even set cookies
for one tab.

=== How it works

The code of an Eliom application is written in OCaml, with <<a_manual
chapter="clientserver-language"|a syntax extension>> to distinguish
between server and client code. The files using this syntax
usually have the extension {{{.eliom}}}. As the compling process is quite
complex, we provide commands called {{{eliomc}}}, {{{eliomopt}}} and {{{js_of_eliom}}} that
does everything for you (separating client and server parts, calling
{{{ocamlc}}}, {{{ocamlopt}}}, {{{js_of_ocaml}}}, etc).

Services belonging to the application are registered using the module
<<a_api subproject="server"|module Eliom_registration.App>>. More precisely,
this is a functor that needs to be applied for each application you create.
These services just return HTML5 pages as usual (using
<<a_api subproject="server"|module Eliom_content.Html>>)
The client side program (compiled in JavaScript) is added automatically by Eliom,
with all its data, and run automatically when the page is loaded.

Module <<a_api subproject="client"|module Eliom_client>> provides
some useful functions for
client side programming with Eliom: e.g. <<a_api
subproject="client"|val Eliom_client.change_page>> for switching to
another page.

Module <<a_api subproject="server"|module Eliom_comet>> allows for the
server to send notifications
to the client (even if the client is not explicitely doing a request).
Use module <<a_api subproject="server"|module Eliom_react>> to make client-server reactive
programming (using the [[http://erratique.ch/software/react| React]]
 external library).


=== The App functor

For each Eliom application, you must create a service registration module
by applying the {{{App}}} functor:

<<code language="ocaml"|
module My_appl =
  Eliom_registration.App (
    struct
      let application_name = "the name of your application"
    end)
>>

the {{{application_name}}} parameter is the name of the javascript file
containing the application.

Then you can do for example:
<<code language="ocaml"|
let my_service =
  My_appl.register_service
    ~path:[""]
    ~get_params:unit
    (fun () () -> Lwt.return (html
                               (head (title (pcdata "Hi!")) [])
                               (body [p [pcdata "Hey."]])))
>>

Eliom will add automatically the required headers to send the client side
program and all its data.

== Application, life and death

When an user enters the page of a service registered by an application
module (created with the {{{App}}} functor), the application
is started. During the life of the application, a single OCaml program
will run on the browser: Lwt threads will keep running, global
variables will stay available, etc.  until the application is
closed. The application will keep running when the user clicks on
links to pages inside the same application.

This application will be closed when:
* the user closes the browser tab containing the application,
* the user goes to a page outside of the application,
* the user changes the current url by another mean than the
  application interaction (reload the page with {{{F5}}},
  manual typing of URL, ...),
* the application call the
  <<a_api subproject="client"|val Eliom_client.exit_to>> function.

It is possible to prevent the application from starting when visiting
an application page by setting the {{{do_not_launch}}} to {{{true}}}
at the service registration:
<<code language="ocaml"|
let no_launch_service =
  My_appl.register_service
    ~option:{ Eliom_registration.default_appl_service_options with
              do_not_launch = true }
    ~path:[""]
    ~get_params:unit
    (fun () () -> Lwt.return (html
                               (head (title (pcdata "Hi!")) [])
                               (body [p [pcdata "Hey."]])))
>>
That way, you can delay the javascript loading until it is really needed.
Visiting a service registered with {{{do_not_launch=true}}} will not stop
a running application.


By default, every link of form towards another service of the same
application is reimplemented by Eliom so that it does not stop the application.
Instead of asking the browser to load a new page, Eliom does an
XML HTTP request (XHR).
You can avoid this and insert regular links or forms by adding the optional
parameter {{{~xhr:false}}}.
This will force reloading the application when the link is clicked.

=== Navigating in and out of the application.

Two functions are available on client side to change the current page
without interaction from the user. The function
<<a_api subproject="client"| val Eliom_client.change_page >> goes to the service
taken as parameter. If the service is in another application or not in
an application it will stop the current one.
The function <<a_api subproject="client" | val Eliom_client.window_open >>
opens an
Eliom service in a new browser window (cf. Javascript's {{{window.open}}}).
<<a_api  subproject="client"| val Eliom_client.exit_to >>
changes the current page and always leaves the application.

== Misc ==

=== Leaving application and going back

Usually, when going to an application page, a new client process is
launched on the server, but there are situations where an old client
process is used instead: Browsers tend to take the result from their
cache when using the back button even if the page was marked (by HTTP
headers) as non-cacheable.
