<<header|
  = Server side state of an Eliom application =

<<wip|
The documentation is now mostly complete, but we are still working on it
(some parts need to be reworked, some small parts are missing).
We will release it as a PDF book in a few week.
Any help appreciated.>>

<<wip|//Warning:// Some part of this chapter need to be updated.
State names and scopes have been merged into one single concept (called
scope again): it is now possible to create several scopes for the same
level (several session scopes for example).
>>

<<outline>>

>>

The server-side state of an application refers to data stored on
server side that could be shared by all clients, or that could be
specific to a limited //scope// such as:

* session,
* group of sessions (for example all sessions of the same user),
* or client-side process.

Saving server-side data is done by using what we call //Eliom
references// (or eref). The server-side state may also contains
//services// registered for a limited scope. States disappear either
when it is discarded explicitely or by a timeout.

In the current implementation, because of some limitation in OCaml's
serialization mechanism, there are three kinds of states (for each
scope):

* volatile data states,
* volatile service states,
* persistent data states.

Volatile states will not survive after relaunching the server.
There is no persistent service state. Be very careful if you use both persistent
state data and service state,
as your session may become inconsistent (use service states
only for volatile services, like coservices with timeouts).

We hope to simplify this when OCaml's serialization mechanism evolves.
In the meantime, be very careful where you store your data.
To avoid shutting down the server, note that it is possible
to ask the server to load dynamically new versions of your site
(see [[config|command {{{reload}}}]]).\\

On a technical point of view, sessions and groups of sessions are
implemented automatically by Eliom by asking the browser to send
a session identifier in a cookie.
Client-side processes also send an identifier in each request,
using some kind of "client-side process-cookie".\\

States can be secure or not. Secure means that the state data or service
will be associated to a secure cookie, that is a cookie that is sent
by the browser only if the protocol is HTTPS. Use secure states to access
confidential data, that you do not want to send through HTTP.

It is possible to give a name to a state if you want several states
for the same application (advanced use). Each state name uses
its own cookies and you can discard data for one state name only.


==Eliom references==

===Principles

//Eliom references// (//erefs//) are some kind of references with
(possibly) a limited scope.  You define the reference with an initial
value and a scope (global, group of sessions, session, client process,
or current request processing). The default is global scope.  When you
change the value, it actually changes only for the scope you
specified.

Eliom references can be persistent or not (that is: can survive after
relaunching the server or not).

Eliom references are used for example:
* to store session data, server side data for a client process,
or user data (scope: session, client process, session group),
* or to keep some information about the current request (scope: request),
for example to give information to the service taking in charge the request
after an action,
* to implement persistent references (scope: global).

Non persistent global Eliom references are equivalent to regular OCaml
references.

===API

Eliom references are created using the function <<a_api | val
Eliom_references.eref>>, that works like the usual Ocaml {{{ref}}}
function, but with one additional scope parameter and several others
optional paramaters that will be explained below. The interface of the
<<a_api | module Eliom_references >> module also defines functions to
<<a_api text="get the value"| val Eliom_references.set>>, <<a_api
text="set the value"| val Eliom_references.sef>> and <<a_api
text="turn back to the default value"| val Eliom_references.unset>>:

<<code language="ocaml"|
type 'a eref

val eref :
  scope:[< Eliom_common.all_scope ] ->
  ?secure:bool ->
  ?persistent:string ->
  'a -> 'a eref

val get : 'a eref -> 'a Lwt.t

val set : 'a eref -> 'a -> unit Lwt.t

val unset : 'a eref -> unit Lwt.t
>>


===Persistent references

Persistent references are implemented using the module <<a_api
project="ocsigenserver" | module Ocsipersist >> for which
Ocsigenserver provides two implementation, one based on {{{SQLite}}},
the other one based on {{{DBM}}}.

Persistent references are created by adding the {{{~persistent}}}
parameter to the {{{Eliom_references.eref}}} function. The value of
this parameter is the name of the reference in the database.

Note that persistent data are serialized on hard drive using OCaml's
unsafe <<span class="code"|Marshal>> module:

<<div class="importantwarning"|

* It is not possible to serialize closures or services (as we are
  using dynamic linking),
* If you ever change the type of serialised data, don't forget to
  change the persistent reference name, or the server will probably
  crash while deserializing!

>>

===@@id="perscount"@@ Example: persistent counter

The following piece of code defines a persistent counter of visits:

<<code language="ocaml"|
open Lwt
open HTML5.M
open Eliom_parameters

let myeref =
  Eliom_references.eref
    ~scope:Eliom_common.global
    ~persistent:"perscount" 0

let count3 =
  let next =
    let mutex = Lwt_mutex.create () in
    (fun () ->
      Lwt_mutex.lock mutex ~>>= fun () ->
      Eliom_references.get myeref ~>>= fun oldc ->
      let newc = oldc + 1 in
      Eliom_references.set myeref newc ~>>= fun () ->
      Lwt_mutex.unlock mutex;
      Lwt.return newc)
  in
  Eliom_output.Html5.register_service
    ~path:["perscount"]
    ~get_params:unit
    (fun () () ->
      next () ~>>=
      (fun n ->
        Lwt.return
         (html
          (head (title (pcdata "counter")) [])
          (body [p [pcdata (string_of_int n)]]))))
>>

As you see, we need to use a mutex, because reading or writing in the
database introduces a Lwt cooperation point.

<<| [[site:tuto/perscount| See this example here]].\\ >>

To implement a counter of visits for each user (each browser), just
use {{{~scope:Eliom_common.session}}} to the {{{eref}}} function call.

===Example: connection of users===

The following example is a Web site with a connection box,
that can be easily placed on each page of the site, thanks to actions
an non-attached services.

It uses an Eliom reference (scope session)
to record the user name (once the user is connected).
It also uses an Eliom reference (scope request) to transmit the "bad user"
information from the action to the service displaying the page.

The session is kept in memory, but if you want it to be persistent,
just add the {{{~persistent}}} parameter while creating the session Eliom
reference.

Later in this chapter, we will give a better version of this example
using session groups and redirections.

<<code language="ocaml"|
(************************************************************)
(****************** Connection of users *********************)
(************************************************************)
open Lwt
open Eliom_parameters
open HTML5.M

(* -------------------------------------------------------- *)
(* We create one main service and two (POST) actions        *)
(* (for connection and disconnection)                       *)

let connect_example =
  Eliom_services.service
    ~path:["connect_example"]
    ~get_params:unit
    ()

let connect_action =
  Eliom_services.post_coservice'
    ~name:"connection"
    ~post_params:(string "login")
    ()

(* disconnect action and box:                               *)
let disconnect_action =
  Eliom_output.Action.register_post_coservice'
    ~name:"disconnection"
    ~post_params:Eliom_parameters.unit
    (fun () () ->
      Eliom_state.discard ~scope:Eliom_common.session ())

let disconnect_box s =
  Eliom_output.Html5.post_form disconnect_action
    (fun _ -> [p [Eliom_output.Html5.string_input
                    ~input_type:`Submit ~value:s ()]]) ()

(* State: *)
(* The following eref is true if the connection has action failed: *)
let bad_user = Eliom_references.eref ~scope:Eliom_common.request false

(* The following eref is the name of the user, when connected *)
let user = Eliom_references.eref ~scope:Eliom_common.session None

(* -------------------------------------------------------- *)
(* new login box:                                           *)

let login_box session_expired bad_u action =
  Eliom_output.Html5.post_form action
    (fun loginname ->
      let l =
        [pcdata "login: ";
         Eliom_output.Html5.string_input ~input_type:`Text ~name:loginname ()]
      in
      [p (if bad_u
        then (pcdata "Wrong user")::(br ())::l
        else
          if session_expired
          then (pcdata "Session expired")::(br ())::l
          else l)
      ])
    ()

(* -------------------------------------------------------- *)
(* Handler for the "connect_example" service (main page):   *)

let connect_example_handler () () =
  (* The following function tests whether the session has expired: *)
  let status = Eliom_state.volatile_data_state_status ~scope:Eliom_common.session ()
  in
  Eliom_references.get bad_user ~>>= fun bad_u ->
  Eliom_references.get user ~>>= fun u ->
  Lwt.return
    (html
       (head (title (pcdata "")) [])
       (body
          (match u, status with
            | Some name, _ ->
              [p [pcdata ("Hello "^name); br ()];
               disconnect_box "Close session"]
            | None, Eliom_state.Expired_state ->
              [login_box true bad_u connect_action;
               p [em [pcdata "The only user is 'toto'."]]]
            | _ ->
              [login_box false bad_u connect_action;
               p [em [pcdata "The only user is 'toto'."]]]
          )))

(* -------------------------------------------------------- *)
(* Handler for connect_action (user logs in):               *)

let connect_action_handler () login =
  Eliom_state.discard ~scope:Eliom_common.session () ~>>= fun () ->
  if login = "toto" (* Check user and password :-) *)
  then Eliom_references.set user (Some login)
  else Eliom_references.set bad_user true


(* -------------------------------------------------------- *)
(* Registration of main services:                           *)

let () =
  Eliom_output.Html5.register ~service:connect_example connect_example_handler;
  Eliom_output.Action.register ~service:connect_action connect_action_handler
>>

==Additional features

===@@id="service_scope"@@Scope of services

It is possible to set a scope for services. Either you want a
(co)-service to be visible only for one user (or one client-side
process, or one session), or you want to define specialized version of
some global services. If you register several time a service with
several scopes, Eliom will try the service in increasing scope order
(that is, first the client process service if any, then session, then
session group, then global).

To limite the scope of a service, just add the argument {{{~scope}}}
to the <<a_api | val Eliom_output.Html5.register>> function (or other
{{{register}}} variants: <<a_api | val Eliom_output.Xhtml.register>>,
...). The default scope is <<a_api | val Eliom_common.global>>.

===Secure states

For security reasons, Eliom does not use the same cookies in https and
http. Secure sessions are using secure cookies (i.e. Ocsigen server
will ask the browsers to send the cookie only if the protocol is
HTTPS). Thus it is not possible to access secure session if the user
is using http. If the user is using https, Eliom will save data and
services in secure session. But it is possible to access unsecure
session data and to register unsecure session services using the
optional parameter {{{~secure:false}}} when calling functions like
<<a_api | val Eliom_references.eref >>, <<a_api | val
Eliom_output.Html5.register >>, etc.

===Discarding states (and closing sessions)

To discard a state, use the <<a_api | val Eliom_states.discard >>
function. It will remove all server-side services and data (persistent
or not) for the given scope. Used with
{{{~scope:Eliom_common.session}}}, this will close a session.

Closing a group of sessions will close all sessions
in the group.\\ <<wip-inline| This behaviour may change in future
versions. >>

By default discarding a state will remove both secure and unsecure data
and services, but if the parameter [~secure] is present.

**Warnings:**

* It is a good idea to close the session when a user tries to connect,
  even if it is already connected (as in the connection example
  above),
* You may also want to unset some request-scoped Eliom references when
  discarding a state,
* If your state data contains opened file descriptors, they won't be
  closed by OCaml's garbage collector. Close it yourself!  (for
  example using <<span class="code"|Gc.finalise>>).\\

It is also possible to discard selectively only services, persistent
data or volatile data (see the <<a_api | module Eliom_state>>
module). But this may be periculous.  Be very careful when doing this,
as you are desynchronizing the three kinds of sessions.





===Named scope

By default, Eliom is using three cookies for sessions (and session groups):

* one for session services,
* one for volatile session data,
* one for persistent session data.

For client side process, it uses the same three kinds of client side
process cookies.

If you need more sessions for the same site (e.g. several different
data sessions), you can create new named sessions, with the following
lines of code:

<<code language="ocaml"|
let custom_session_name = Eliom_common.create_scope_name "custom"
let custom_session = `Session custom_session_name
>>

Then, the value {{{custom_session}}} could replace the usual <<a_api |
val Eliom_common.session>> for the {{{~scope}}} parameter of functions
<<a_api | val Eliom_references.eref>>, <<a_api| val
Eliom_output.Html5.register >>, <<a_api| val Eliom_state.discard >>,
...

You could also create named client_process scope and session_group by
replacing {{{`Session}}} by {{{`Client_process}}} or
{{{`Session_group}}}. In all case, the <<a_api | val
Eliom_common.create_scope_name >> function will prevent you to create
to identical scope name.


The online tutorial has been implemented using this feature, even if
it has been hidden for the sake of simplicity. That's how the
different examples of sessions in the tutorial are independant.


===Session groups

The idea is complementary to the idea of names scope. While named
scope allows for a single session to have multiple buckets of data
associated with it, a session group (also optional) allows multiple
sessions to be referenced together.

For example, it is a good idea to group together all the opened
sessions for a same user (if he is using several browsers). In this
case, the session group is named after the user name.

//Example of use:// Share a shopping basket between several devices
(your mobile phone and your laptop).

Using persistant Eliom references with scope "session group" is a
convenient way to store data about a user without having to use an
external database. Do not hesitate to use them instead of session
scope, as it is fits probably most your needs better than sessions.

**The use of session groups is highly encouraged!**, because:

* //The number of sessions in a group is limited.// If all
  sessions are in a group you will avoid some malicious user to open
  too many sessions.  If you do not use session groups, the number of
  sessions is limitated by IP address, which can be a problem for
  example if the server is behind a reverse proxy or if many user are
  using the same NAT.
* It allows to implement features like "close all sessions" for one
  user (even those opened on other browsers).  Consider the following
  scenario: a user logs in from home using a "Remember me on this
  computer" feature, which sets a (almost) no-expiration cookie on his
  browser and session timeouts of infinity on the server.  The user
  goes on vacation, and while logging from a cyber-café, she also sets
  the "Remember me" option.  Back home she realises her mistake, and
  wishes to do a "global logout", ie, closing all existing sessions
  associated with her user name.\\

It is highly recommended to set a group for each of the three kinds of states
you use (services, volatile data and persistent data).\\


The following example rewrite with session groups the previous example
of user connection.

There is also some additional changes:

* it use named scope
* it use persistent sessions
* it use a redirection instead of an action in case the connection
  succeeded, so that the browser does not try to repost the connection
  data if the user press the "reload" button. The redirection goes
  towards <<a_api | Eliom_services.void_hidden_coservice'>>, that is:
  service corresponding to current URL.

<<code language="ocaml"|
(************************************************************)
(********* Connection of users with session groups **********)
(************************************************************)

open Lwt
open Eliom_parameters
open HTML5.M

let session_name =
     Eliom_common.create_scope_name "session_group_example_state"
let session = `Session session_name
let session_group = `Session_group session_name


(* -------------------------------------------------------- *)
(* We create one main service and two (POST) actions        *)
(* (for connection and disconnection)                       *)

let connect_example =
  Eliom_services.service
    ~path:["sessgrp"]
    ~get_params:unit
    ()

let connect_action =
  Eliom_services.post_coservice'
    ~name:"connection2"
    ~post_params:(string "login")
    ()

(* disconnect action and box:                               *)

let disconnect_action =
  Eliom_output.Action.register_post_coservice'
    ~name:"disconnection2"
    ~post_params:Eliom_parameters.unit
    (fun () () ->
      Eliom_state.discard ~scope:session ())

let disconnect_box s =
  Eliom_output.Html5.post_form disconnect_action
    (fun _ -> [p [Eliom_output.Html5.string_input
                    ~input_type:`Submit ~value:s ()]]) ()

(* The following eref is true if the connection has action failed: *)
let bad_user = Eliom_references.eref ~scope:Eliom_common.request false

(* The following eref is the epoch time of the last connection in the
   group: *)
let last_connection = Eliom_references.eref ~scope:session_group 0.


(* -------------------------------------------------------- *)
(* new login box:                                           *)

let login_box session_expired bad_u action =
  Eliom_output.Html5.post_form action
    (fun loginname ->
      let l =
        [pcdata "login: ";
         Eliom_output.Html5.string_input
	   ~input_type:`Text ~name:loginname ()]
      in
      [p (if bad_u
        then (pcdata "Wrong user")::(br ())::l
        else
          if session_expired
          then (pcdata "Session expired")::(br ())::l
          else l)
     ])
    ()

(* -------------------------------------------------------- *)
(* Handler for the "connect_example" service (main page):   *)

let connect_example_handler () () =
  (* The following function tests whether the session has expired: *)
  let status = Eliom_state.volatile_data_state_status ~scope:session ()
  in
  let group =
    Eliom_state.get_volatile_data_session_group ~scope:session ()
  in
  lwt bad_u = Eliom_references.get bad_user in
  lwt last = Eliom_references.get last_connection in
  Lwt.return
    (html
       (head (title (pcdata "")) [])
       (body
          (match group, status with
          | Some name, _ ->
              [p [pcdata ("Hello "^name); br ();
		  pcdata ("Last connection: "^string_of_float last);
		  br ()];
              disconnect_box "Close session"]
          | None, Eliom_state.Expired_state ->
              [login_box true bad_u connect_action;
               p [em [pcdata "The only user is 'toto'."]]]
          | _ ->
              [login_box false bad_u connect_action;
               p [em [pcdata "The only user is 'toto'."]]]
          )))

(* -------------------------------------------------------- *)
(* Handler for connect_action (user logs in):               *)

let connect_action_handler () login =
  lwt () = Eliom_state.discard ~scope:session () in
  if login = "toto" (* Check user and password :-) *)
  then begin
    Eliom_state.set_volatile_data_session_group
      ~set_max:4 ~scope:session login;
    lwt () = Eliom_references.set last_connection (Unix.time ()) in
    Eliom_output.Redirection.send Eliom_services.void_hidden_coservice'
  end
  else
    lwt () = Eliom_references.set bad_user true in
    Eliom_output.Action.send ()


(* -------------------------------------------------------- *)
(* Registration of main services:                           *)

let () =
  Eliom_output.Html5.register
    ~service:connect_example connect_example_handler;
  Eliom_output.Any.register
    ~service:connect_action connect_action_handler
>>


===Timeouts and session duration==

The default timeout for sessions in one hour. Sessions will be
automatically closed after that amount of time of inactivity from the
user. You can change that value for your whole site using the <<a_api
| val Eliom_state.set_global_volatile_state_timeout>>. For example:

<<code language="ocaml"|
Eliom_state.set_global_volatile_state_timeout
  ~scope:Eliom_common.session (Some 7200.)
>>

Here 7200 seconds. {{{None}}} would mean no timeout.

Note that there is also a possibility to change the default value
for Eliom in the configuration file like this:
<<code language="ocaml"|
    <extension findlib-package="ocsigenserver.ext.eliom">
      <volatiletimeout value="7200"/>
    </extension>
>>

In the configuration files the value {{{"infinity"}}} would mean no
timeout.

**Warning:** that default may be overriden by each site using <<a_api|
 val Eliom_state.set_global_volatile_timeout >> or <<a_api| val
 Eliom_state.set_default_volatile_timeout >>.  If you want your user
 to be able to set the default in the configuration file for your site
 (between <<span class="code"|<site>>> and <<span
 class="code"|</site>>>), you must parse the configuration ( <<a_api|
 val Eliom_config.get_config >> function).

You can also change the timeout for a specific user only with the
following functions: <<a_api | val
Eliom_state.set_volatile_data_state_timeout >>.

For more details, see the <<a_api | module Eliom_state >> module's
interface.

===Cookies

Eliom references are used to store a state server side.
It is also possible to ask the browser or the client-side process
to record some piece of data and send it back to the server with each request.

This is implemented using the usual browser cookies for sessions,
and a simulation of browser cookies by Eliom client side processes.

To set or unset your own cookies on the client, use the following functions,
from module <<a_api | module Eliom_state>>:
<<code language="ocaml"|
val set_cookie :
  ?cookie_scope:Eliom_common.cookie_scope ->
  ?path:string list ->
  ?exp:float ->
  ?secure:bool ->
  name:string -> value:string ->unit -> unit

val unset_cookie :
  ?cookie_scope:Eliom_common.cookie_scope ->
  ?path:string list ->
  name:string -> unit -> unit
>>


The <<span class="code"|?path>> argument is the path for which you want
to set/unset the cookie (relative to the main directory of your site,
defined
in the configuration file).
<<span class="code"|None>> means for all your site.

The <<span class="code"|?exp>> parameter is a the expiration date
(Unix timestamp, in seconds since the epoch).
<<span class="code"|None>> means that the cookie will expire when the browser
will be closed.

If the <<span class="code"|?secure>> argument is set to true (default:
false) and the protocol is https, the server will ask the browser to
send the cookie only through secure connections.

The <<span class="code"|?cookie_scope>> argument
is {{{`Session}}} for regular browser cookies (default),
or {{{`Client_process}}} for clien process cookies
(available only if you have a client side Eliom program).

You can access the cookies sent by the browser using
 <<a_api| val Eliom_request_info.get_cookies >>.

Example:

<<code language="ocaml"|let cookiename = "mycookie"

let cookies = service ["cookies"] unit ()

let _ = Eliom_output.Xhtml.register cookies
  (fun () () ->
    Eliom_state.set_cookie
      ~name:cookiename ~value:(string_of_int (Random.int 100)) ();
    Lwt.return
      (html
         (head (title (pcdata "")) [])
         (body [p [pcdata (try
                             "cookie value: "^
                               (Ocsigen_lib.String_Table.find
                                  cookiename (Eliom_request_info.get_cookies ()))
                           with _ -> "<cookie not set>");
                   br ();
                   a cookies [pcdata "send other cookie"] ()]])))
>>

<<| [[site:tuto/cookies| Try it]]. >>
