
= Eliom's Distillery==

The easiest way to initialize, compile, and run a project in
Ocsigen/Eliom is to use the Eliom distillery {{{eliom-distillery}}}.

It is self-documenting (refer to {{{eliom-distillery -help}}} and the
generated {{{README}}}), but here is a bit information on how to work
with it.

<<outline depth="2"| <<header| **Table of contents** >> >>



=== Project Initialization

The {{{eliom-distillery}}} creates projects from templates.
Template "basic" create a very simple project (makefiles and configuration file
and main service). There is also a template "mobile" for mobile apps.

To create your project, do:

<<code language="shell"|
$ eliom-distillery -name <name> -template basic.ppx [-target-directory <dir>]
>>

This creates a project named {{{<name>}}} from the {{{"basic.ppx"}}}
template in the directory {{{<dir>}}} or {{{<name>}}} by default.
The project name should be a valid name for an OCaml compilation unit.
The project directory contains the following files

 * {{{<name>.eliom}}} \\
   This is your initial source file.
   All Eliom files (*.eliom, *.eliomi) in this directory are
   automatically considered.  To add a .ml/.mli file to your project,
   add it to the variable SERVER_FILES or CLIENT_FILES in
   {{{Makefile.options}}}.

 * {{{static/}}} \\
   The content of this folder is statically served. It contains
   initially a basic CSS file for your project.

 * {{{Makefile.options}}} \\
   Configure your project here!

 * {{{name.conf.in}}} \\
   This file is a template for the configuration file for
   ocsigenserver. You will rarely need to edit it: it can be
   personalized through variables in {{{Makefile.options}}}.
   In particular, this way, the installation rules and the
   configuration files remains coherent.

 * {{{Makefile}}} \\
   This contains all rules necessary to build, test, and run your
   Eliom application. You should avoid modifying it. See below for the
   relevant targets.

 * {{{README}}} \\
   An explanation of how to compile, test, install, and run your
   application

=== Compilation & Running: Read the README

You can just run
<<code language="shell"|
$ make test.byte
>>
or
<<code language="shell"|
$ make test.opt
>>
to compile your project and run ocsigenserver with it.

Please refer to the generated README file for further hints
on how to work with your project.
