=Accesscontrol=

Accesscontrol is in beta version. Submit your bugs and feature wishes [[../trac/|here]].

= The accesscontrol extension =

If you want to restrict access for some sites, this extension is for you. This is still quite experimental, so don't hesitate to test it and report bugs!

In order to use it, you must first add the following line to your {{{ocsigen.conf}}}:
{{{
<extension findlib-package="ocsigen_ext.accesscontrol"/>
}}}

Here, we call ''actions'' elements that can be put in a site configuration. Actions include {{{<eliom>}}}, {{{<static>}}}, etc.

This extension defines several actions.

== The {{{<if>}}} action ==

It takes as children a condition followed by a {{{<then>}}} element and possibly an {{{<else>}}} element. When a request reaches an {{{<if>}}}, if the condition evaluates to true, then the whole {{{<if>}}} behaves as if it had been replaced by the contents of the {{{<then>}}} element, otherwise it behaves as if it had been replaced by the contents of the {{{<else>}}} element. A missing {{{<else>}}} is considered as an {{{<else>}}} with no children.

=== Conditions ===

Atomic conditions:

 * {{{<ip value="..." />}}}: {{{value}}} can be an IPv4 or IPv6 address, with an optional {{{/n}}} suffix indicating a subnet mask; true if the IP address of the client matches {{{value}}}.
 * {{{<port value="..." />}}}: {{{value}}} can be a number; true if the request was received on port {{{value}}}. (new in 1.2)
 * {{{<ssl/>}}}: true if the request was received by HTTPS. (new in 1.2)
 * {{{<header name="..." regexp="..." />}}}: true if the header of the request has a {{{name}}} field that matches {{{regexp}}}.
 * {{{<method value="..." />}}}: true if the HTTP method ({{{GET}}}, {{{POST}}}, etc) of the request is {{{value}}}.
 * {{{<protocol value="..." />}}}: {{{value}}} can be {{{HTTP/1.0}}} or {{{HTTP/1.1}}}; true if the protocol specified in the request is {{{value}}}.
 * {{{<path regexp="..." />}}}: true if the part of the path concerning the site matches {{{regexp}}}.

Combining conditions (all their children must be conditions):

 * {{{<and>...</and>}}}: true if all enclosed conditions are true (true if empty).
 * {{{<or>...</or>}}}: true if one of the enclosed conditions is true (false if empty).
 * {{{<not>...</not>}}}: true if the enclosed condition is false (there must be exactly one enclosed condition).

== Other actions ==

 * {{{<notfound/>}}}: stops immediately (does not try other sites) with a 404 error.
 * {{{<forbidden/>}}}: stops immediately (does not try other sites) with a 403 error.
 * {{{<iffound>...</iffound>}}}: tries the enclosed actions if some action has already answered.
 * {{{<ifnotfound code="...">...</ifnotfound>}}}: tries the enclosed actions if noone has answered so far. {{{code}}} is an optional regexp matching the current error code.
 * {{{<nextsite/>}}}: stops parsing current site. If the page has been found, answer. If not, try next site. ''from Ocsigen 1.2''
 * {{{<nexthost/>}}}: stops parsing current host. If the page has been found, answer. If not, try next host. ''from Ocsigen 1.2''
 * {{{<stop/>}}}: stops parsing configuration file (answers now whether the page has been found or not). ''from Ocsigen 1.2''
 * {{{<allow-forward-for/>}}}: if there is an X-Forwarded-For header in the request, the informations of the request are changed to match the announced ip.
 * {{{<allow-forward-proto/>}}}: if the X-Forwarded-Proto header is set to https (http), the connection is considered as secured (unsecure) even if the connection is not in ssl (is in ssl).

== Examples ==

 * I want some actions to handle only requests from localhost, for users using the browser Konqueror:
{{{
<if>
  <and>
    <ip value="127.0.0.1" />
    <header name="user-agent" regexp=".*Konqueror.*" />
  </and>
  <then>
    <!-- put your actions here -->
  </then>
</if>
}}}

 * I want some actions to handle requests that respect at least one of the following conditions:
  * they belong to the subnet 123.123.123.0/24,
  * or they want to access a page beginning with the letter 'c',
  * or they are not doing a {{{GET HTTP}}} request:
{{{
<if>
  <or>
    <ip value="123.123.123.0/24" />
    <path regexp="/c.*" />
    <not><method value="GET" /></not>
  </or>
  <then>
    <!-- put your actions here -->
  </then>
</if>
}}}

 * I want to deny access to 192.168.0.0/24 except 192.168.0.42, and to 192.168.99.0/24:
{{{
<if>
  <or>
    <and>
      <ip value="192.168.0.0/24" />
      <not><ip value="192.168.0.42" /></not>
    </and>
    <ip value="192.168.99.0/24" />
  </or>
  <then>
    <forbidden/>
  </then>
</if>
}}}
