=@@id="wrapping"@@Wrapping =

Reading of this chapter isn't mandatory for writing eliom
application. It's worth a reading however before hacking in the eliom
codebase.

<<outline depth="2"| <<header| **Table of contents** >> >>


== Basics ==

The server side of Eliom can communicates to the client other kind of
data than the raw XML contents of the pages. The wrapper mecanism is
used to allow the browser side to access to the contents of variables
declared on server side. For instance when we write
<<code language="ocaml"| ignore {unit{ Dom_html.window##alert(Js.string %text) }} >>
the contents of the {{{text}}} variable is sent along the page for the client code to access it.

Server side, when <<code language="ocaml"| {{ Dom_html.window##alert(Js.string %text) }} >>
is executed, the variable {{{text}}} is registered into a table and an id is associated to it.
This table will containt all the datas references by variables annotated with % in a page, and
will be sent marshalled to the client. On client side the id will be used to retrieve {{{text}}}.

Since all datas are sent in one table, if a variable is referenced
multiples times, it will be sent only once, and sharing will be preserved:

<<code language="ocaml"|let a = ref 0 in
let b = (1,a) in
ignore {unit{
  %a := 42;
  Dom_html.window##alert(Js.string (string_of_int (snd (%b))))
}}
>>

This code will display 42. After being sent, the client and server
side values are distinct: the server side version of {{{a}}} won't be
modified by the client side affectation and conversly the client side
value won't change if {{{a}}} is changed later on server side.

== Special types ==

=== Custom wrappers ===

Usualy, client and server side values are represented the same way,
and it is sufficient to only copy their content ( marshalled ) to the
client. But certain types can't be transmitted this easilly: for
instance, services.

Those values must be transformed before marshalling: We need for this to use
custom wrappers. This wrapping mechanism is defined in
<<a_api | module Eliom_wrap >>.

Before sending, the values goes throught <<a_api | val Eliom_wrap.wrap>>
which transform marked values. A value marked is a value which have as its last field
a value of type <<a_api | type Eliom_wrap.wrapper >>. For instance
<<code language="ocaml"|type marked_tupple = ( int * ... * marked_tupple Eliom_wrap.wrapper )
type marked_record =
     { f1 : int;
          ...
       fn : marked_record Eliom_wrap.wrapper }
>>
but not
<<code language="ocaml"|type not_marked_tupple = ( int * ... * marked_tupple Eliom_wrap.wrapper * float )
type not_marked_tupple = ( int * ... * ( int * marked_tupple Eliom_wrap.wrapper ) )
type not_marked_tupple = ( int * ... * marked_tupple Eliom_wrap.wrapper list )
type not_marked_record =
     { f1 : int;
          ...
       fn : marked_record Eliom_wrap.wrapper;
       fk : float; }>>

A wrapper is created by the <<a_api | val Eliom_wrap.create_wrapper>>
function. It takes a function as parameter which will be called to
transform the value during the wrapping. There is also a special
wrapper <<a_api | val Eliom_wrap.empty_wrapper>> which does nothing. It
is usefull to stop calling the wrapper on a value: If there is still a
wrapper in a value after its transformation, it will be called another
time, potentially leading to an infinite loop.

For instance

<<code language="ocaml"|type v = Fun of unit -> int | Value of int
type wrapped_type = ( v * wrapped_type Eliom_wrap.wrapper)
let wrapper = Eliom_wrap.create_wrapper (function
     | Value i,wrapper -> Value i, Eliom_wrap.empty_wrapper
     | Fun f,wrapper -> Value (f ()), Eliom_wrap.empty_wrapper)
let v = ( Fun (fun () -> 1), wrapper )
let (v', empty_wrapper) = Eliom_wrap.wrap v>>

At that time {{{v'}}} will be {{{Value 1}}}. Notice that
<<a_api | val Eliom_wrap.create_wrapper>> does not enforce the output
type of the wrapping function to be the same as the input type:
Eliom_wrap is to be use with much caution! Do not use it if you don't
understand how it works, it may lead to unpredictable segmentation faults
and corrupted memory.

=== Custom unwrappers ===

We may also want to modify the value at unwrapping time. It is the
case for instance of the type <<a_api | type Eliom_react.Up.t>>. On server
side, it is transformed to a service, and the service is transformed to a
function which call it on client side.

To do this, we use custom unwrappers. A value is marked by an unwrapper
the same way as with wrappers: A value is marked if its last field is a
value of type <<a_api | type Eliom_wrap.unwrapper >>. An unwrapper does
not contain functions, it only contains an identifier of type
<<a_api | type Eliom_wrap.unwrap_id >>. On client side a function can
be registered to transformed values marked with an id:
<<a_api subproject="client" | val Eliom_unwrap.register_unwrapper >>.

<<code language="ocaml"|type marked_int = (int * marked_int Eliom_wrap.unwrapper)

{shared{let marked_int_id = 123456}}

let v : marked_int = ( 10, Eliom_wrap.create_unwrapper (Eliom_wrap.id_of_int marked_int_id))

{client{
  let marked_int_unwrapper ( i, unwrapper ) = ( fun j -> i + j )
  let id = Eliom_client_unwrap.id_of_int marked_int_id
  let () = Eliom_client_unwrap.register_unwrapper id marked_int_unwrapper
}}
>>
When the client will receive the value {{{v}}} it will transform it to {{{fun j -> j + 10}}}

Thoses id are globals, take care of not using an existing one, you
could for instance use the name of you type hashed as id. Consider
those below 1024 to be reserved to Eliom internals.

== Eliom types with predefined custom wrappers ==

The Eliom types that are marked are:

* <<a_api | type Eliom_service.service>> transformed to <<a_api | type Eliom_service.service>> (but the client side representation)
* <<a_api | type Eliom_comet.Channel.t>> transformed to <<a_api project="lwt" | type Lwt_stream.t>>
* <<a_api | type Eliom_react.Up.t>> transformed to {{{ 'a -> unit }}}
* <<a_api | type Eliom_react.Down.t>> transformed to {{{ 'a React.E.t }}}
* <<a_api | type Eliom_bus.t>> transformed to <<a_api | type Eliom_bus.t>>
