=Compiling and configuring Eliom modules=

==@@id="p3misc"@@Eliom modules==

===Compiling Eliom modules===

If you're application is server-side only, it is easy to compile an
Eliom module (here {{{example.ml}}}) with the following command:

<<div class="pre"|ocamlfind ocamlc -thread -package ocsigen -c example.ml>>

<<div class="wip"|Compiling client-server applications>>

===Configuration file===

To run an Ocsigen server with an Eliom module {{{example.cmo}}},
add the following lines to Ocsigen's configuration file
(<<span class="code"|/etc/ocsigen/ocsigen.conf>> most of the times):

<<div class="pre"|<host>
  <site path="examples">
    <eliom module="~///path_to///example.cmo" />
  </site>
</host>
>>

The bloc surrounded by the {{{<site>}}} tag creates a sub-site on your
host, in directory {{{examples}}}. The {{{<site>}}} tag is optional if
you want to register your services at the root of the server path tree.

The {{{<eliom>}}} tag defines an Eliom module to be loaded (dynamically while
starting Ocsigen server) for this subsite.

===Running Ocsigen server===

Run Ocsigen server, by typing the command
{{{
ocsigen
}}}
or, if your configuration file is not in the default 
location:
<<div class="pre"|
ocsigen -c //<your configuration file>//
>>

You should see the page corresponding to service {{{"coucou"}}} in site
{{{examples/}}} at url
<<span class="code"|~http:~/~///your_server///examples/coucou>>.\\

===Several Eliom modules for one site===

<<div class="wip"|BLA À REVOIR !>>

If your site consists of several modules, you can load them
consecutively from the configuration file using 
<<span class="code"|<eliommodule>>> (same syntax as 
<<span class="code"|<eliom>>>, the difference being that
<<span class="code"|<eliommodule>>> does not generate any page).
In that case, only the position of the
<<span class="code"|<eliom>>>
tag will be taken into account for generating the page using 
Eliom.
Note that there can be only one <<span class="code"|<eliom>>>
tag for each <<span class="code"|<site>>>
(or <<span class="code"|<host>>>).

===Using findlib with Eliom modules===

If your module has a findlib <<span class="code"|META>> file,
it is also possible to do:

<<div class="pre"|<host>
  <site path="examples">
    <eliom findlib-package="//package-name//" />
  </site>
</host>
>>


===Advanced use: create an extension for the server that access Eliom's data
    
    
If you want an Ocsigen extension with access to Eliom's
  data (for example if you want an extension that will
  register some services), you can use the function
  <<ocsigendoc version="dev" file="Eliom_extensions.html" fragment="VALregister_eliom_extension"|<<span class="code"|Eliom_extensions.register_eliom_extension>>>>
  to register the function that will generate the
  <<span class="code"|Ocsigen_extensions.answer>>.

===Static linking of Eliom modules

From version 1.2, it is possible to link extensions and Eliom modules
statically ([[site:ocsigenserver/staticlink|See here]]).
Obviously, for Eliom modules, service registration and options setting must be delayed until the configuration file is read. To create a statically linkable Eliom module, use the function
<<ocsigendoc version="dev" file="Eliom_services.html" fragment="VALregister_eliom_module"|<<span class="code"|Eliom_services.register_eliom_module>>>>. It takes as parameters the name of the module and the initialization function, that will be called when the module is initialized in the configuration file. That function will register services (and possibly call <<ocsigendoc version="dev" file="Eliom_config.html" fragment="VALget_config"|<<span class="code"|Eliom_config.get_config>>>> if the module has configuration options).

To initialize the module from the configuration file, use the syntax:

<<div class="pre"|<eliommodule name="//name//"> ... </eliommodule>
>>
(or <<span class="code"|<eliom name="//name//"> ... </eliom> >>)

    
which is equivalent to:
<<div class="pre"|<eliommodule module="//name.cmxs//"> ... </eliommodule>
>>
(or <<span class="code"|<eliom module="//name.cmxs//"> ... </eliom> >>)

    
with the exception that it does not load the module using <<span class="code"|Dynlink>>, but calls the initialization function.
    

You can use functions like 
<<ocsigendoc version="dev" file="Eliom_state.html" fragment="VALcreate_volatile_table"|<<span class="code"|Eliom_state.create_volatile_table>>>>
that needs some information about the site (here, volatile tables are associated to a site), only during a request or during the initialisation phase of the server.

If you want to use that kind of function before the initialisation phase,
for example if your module is linked statically with the server,
you must call these function using the function
<<ocsigendoc version="dev" file="Eliom_services.html" fragment="VALregister_eliom_module"|<<span class="code"|Eliom_services.register_eliom_module>>>>.
(One solution is to use a lazy value to delay the creation of the table,
and force that value during the registration function).

  >>




===Defining an exception handler for the whole site
    
    
When an exception is raised during the generation of a page,
or when the page has not been found or has wrong parameters,
an HTTP error 500 or 404 is sent to the client. You may want to
catch these exceptions to print your own error page.
Do this using <<ocsigendoc version="dev" file="Eliom_services.html" fragment="VALset_exn_handler"|<<span class="code"|Eliom_services.set_exn_handler>>>>.
Here is the handler used by this tutorial:

    
<<code language="ocaml"|let _ = Eliom_services.set_exn_handler
   (fun e -> match e with
    | Eliom_common.Eliom_404 ->
        Eliom_output.Xhtml.send ~code:404
          (html
             (head (title (pcdata "")) [])
             (body [h1 [pcdata "Eliom tutorial"];
                    p [pcdata "Page not found"]]))
(*    | Eliom_common.Eliom_Wrong_parameter ->
        Eliom_output.Xhtml.send
          (html
             (head (title (pcdata "")) [])
             (body [h1 [pcdata "Eliom tutorial"];
                    p [pcdata "Wrong parameters"]])) *)
    | e -> fail e)
>>

===Giving configuration options to your sites
    
    
You can add your own options in the configuration
file for your Web site. For example:
    

    
<<code language="ocaml"|
    <eliom module="//path_to///yourmodule.cmo">
      <youroptions> ...
    </eliom>

>>

    
 Use <<ocsigendoc version="dev" file="Eliom_state.html" fragment="VALget_config"|<<span class="code"|Eliom_config.get_config ()>>>> during the initialization
 of your module to get the data between
 <<span class="code"|<eliom>>> and <<span class="code"|</eliom>>>.
 Warning: parsing these data is very basic for now.
 That feature will be improved in the future.

    




==@@id="p3config"@@Configuration options

Here are Eliom's options you can use in configuration files.

===Timeouts

Timeouts for sessions can be set either inside tag
{{{<extension findlib-package="ocsigen.ext.eliom"/>}}}
(default value for all sites),
or inside a {{{<eliom/>}}} tag (default for one site).

Timeouts can also be modified programmatically using functions
like {{{Eliom_state.set_global_volatile_timeout}}}, but by default
these functions will not override configuration files.
(see module <<ocsigendoc version="dev" file="Eliom_state.html"|<<span class="code"|Eliom_state>>>> for other functions).
Thus, a website can set its own defaults and the user can still
override them from the configuration file.
If you want to set a timeout programmatically even if it has been
modified in a configuration file, use the optional parameter
{{{~override_configfile:true}}}.

Timeouts can be set either for all session names, for one precise 
session name, or for the default session name.
To do that programmatically, use the optional parameter
{{{~state_name}}}.
To do that in configuration file, use the optional attribute
{{{sessionname}}} (where an empty string value means default session name).
If this attribute is absent, the timeout will affect all sessions for which
no other default has been set. The {{{sessionname}}} attribute
exists only inside an {{{<eliom/>}}} tag 
(and not inside {{{<extension findlib-package="ocsigen.ext.eliom"/>}}}).

* {{{<volatiletimeout value="30" [sessionname=""]/>}}}
  The default timeout for
  volatile (in memory) sessions.
  value="infinity" means that the session will
  never finish.
  Note that each eliom module may set its own
  default, that will override this one.
* {{{<persistenttimeout value="7200"/>}}}
  Idem for persistent session data
* {{{<datatimeout value="30"  [sessionname=""]/>}}}
     Like <timeout>, but for in memory data
     sessions only
     (not service sessions).
* {{{<servicetimeout value="30" [sessionname=""]/>}}} 
  Like <timeout>, but for service sessions only
     (not in memory data  sessions).

===Garbage collector of sessions and services

These options can appear inside tag
{{{<extension findlib-package="ocsigen.ext.eliom"/>}}}.
For now, it cannot be set for each site independently
(tell us if you need that).

* {{{<sessiongcfrequency value="30"/>}}} 
     Time between two garbage
     collections of sessions, in seconds (default
     3600) "infinity" means no GC of session.
* {{{<persistentsessiongcfrequency value="86400"/>}}} 
     Time between two
     garbage collections of persistent sessions,
     in seconds (default 86400.) "infinity"
     means no GC of session.
* {{{<servicesessiongcfrequency value="3600"/>}}} 
     Like {{{<sessiongcfrequency>}}},
     but for service sessions only
* {{{<datasessiongcfrequency value="3600"/>}}} 
     Like {{{<sessiongcfrequency>}}},
     but for "in memory data" sessions only

===Limiting the number of sessions or coservices

To prevent from denial of service, Eliom limits the number of sessions
and the number of dynamic coservices. Without these limitations, it would
be possible for an attacker to open repeatedly lots of sessions,
or creating new services (for example CSRF safe coservices can create lots
of coservices when you reload repeatedly a page). When the limit is reached,
it is still possible to open new sessions or create new services, but the
oldest session or service will disappear (the one that has not been used
for the longest time).

====Limiting sessions
First of all, there is a limitation of the number of sessions in a
session group. The typical use of this is when an user opens several
sessions from several computers. All the sessions belong to the same
group (the group name is usually the user name).
The limit is usually small (5 sessions per group by default).
This limit is implemented for all kinds of sessions (service session, 
volatile and persistent data sessions). For persistent sessions, the
implementation is not very efficient for very large limits.

It is highly recommended to use session groups when possible.

If you can't use session groups, the number of sessions is limitated
by sub network for volatile sessions (service sessions and data sessions).
The limitation is larger (default 1 million). The limit must be large enough,
for example if the server is behind a reverse proxy, all incoming requests
will come from the same IP address. Limiting by sub network instead of by 
IP address prevents attacks even if the attacker has a whole sub network
available. The default mask for sub networks is {{{/16}}} for IPv4
and {{{/56}}} for IPv6.

Some figures: If 1 session takes 1000 bytes (data + tables etc),
1 million sessions take 1 GB. If somebody opens 1000 sessions per second, 
then it will take 1000 s (16 minutes) to reach 1000000.
It means that regular users will have their sessions closed
after 16 minutes of inactivity if they share their sub network with
someone doing an attack (or if the server is behind a proxy).

For persistent sessions, there is no limitation per sub network for now.
1 billion sessions take 1 TB. If somebody opens 1000 sessions per second, 
then it will take 1 million s (16000 minutes = 266 h = 11 days) 
to reach 1TB.

====Limiting services

The number of anonymous coservices is limited by session
or by sub network if the service is registered in the global table.
Default values: 1000 for one session, and 500000 for one subnet.

Note that there is no limitation of named coservices or regular services.
It is not a good practice to allow the creation of too much services
of this kinds dynamically.


====How to set limits

The limits and the subnet mask can be set programmatically by each module
(for example to adapt the values to the size of session data) or in the
configuration file
(for example to adapt the values to the size of memory or network 
configuration)
(see module <<ocsigendoc version="dev" file="Eliom_state.html"|<<span class="code"|Eliom_state>>>>).
By default, functions like 
{{{Eliom_state.set_default_max_volatile_sessions_per_group}}}
will not override a value set in the configuration file
(but if you use {{{~override_configfile:true}}}).
Thus, a website can set its own defaults and the user can still
override them from the configuration file.

The configuration file options can be set either inside the tag
{{{<extension findlib-package="ocsigen.ext.eliom"/>}}}
(global configuration), or inside the {{{<eliom/>}}} tag
(configuration for each site). But the limits always are for one
site (that is: a global limit value of 10 means 10 for each Eliom site).

The syntax is:
* {{{<maxvolatilesessionspergroup value="10"/>}}} 
* {{{<maxservicesessionspergroup value="10"/>}}} 
* {{{<maxdatasessionspergroup value="10"/>}}} 
* {{{<maxpersistentsessionspergroup value="10"/>}}} 
* {{{<maxvolatilesessionspersubnet value="500000"/>}}} 
* {{{<maxservicesessionspersubnet value="500000"/>}}} 
* {{{<maxdatasessionspersubnet value="500000"/>}}} 
* {{{<maxanonymouscoservicespersession value="1000"/>}}} 
* {{{<maxanonymouscoservicespersubnet value="500000"/>}}} 
* {{{<ipv4subnetmask value="255.255.128.0"/>}}} 
* {{{<ipv6subnetmask value="ff:ff:ff:ff:ff:ff::"/>}}} 

